Islamabad: Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan and the Organisation of Islamic Conference today raked up the Kashmir issue, hitting out at India over its "illegal" decision to abrogate Article 370. Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi also called for collective response from the 57-member OIC to meet challenges faced by the Muslim community, highlighting conflicts in the Middle East and the "denial of the right to self-determination" for the people of Palestine and Kashmir.
"We have failed both the Palestinians and the people of Kashmir. I am sad to say that we have been able to make no impact at all. They don't take us seriously, we are a divided house and those powers know it," Khan said during his keynote address. While India has expressed its desire to have normal neighbourly relations with Islamabad in an environment free of terror, hostility and violence, it has also made it clear that Jammu and Kashmir "was, is and shall forever" remain an integral part of the country.
Foreign Minister Qureshi meanwhile spoke at length about the "abominable subjugation" that has purportedly left Muslims in Palestine and Kashmir reeling to this day. "For the last seven decades, they have struggled to achieve their inalienable right to self-determination," a report by Dawn quoted him as saying. He alleged that India's actions violated the resolutions of the UN Security Council and increased the threat of a conflict between the two countries.
Related News
India hits out at OIC for inviting Hurriyat Conference to its meet in Pakistan
India hits out at OIC for inviting Hurriyat Conference to its meet in Pakistan

While India insists that the abrogation of Article 370 and the bifurcation of the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories is an internal matter, Pakistan has made repeated unsuccessful attempts to drum up international support against the other country. Addressing the 48th Council of Foreign Ministers of the OIC today, Khan claimed that "nothing happened because they (India) felt no pressure."
The OIC session is being attended by more than 600 delegates, including Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi who is attending as a special guest at the invitation of his Pakistani counterpart. Ironically Pakistan PM, Khan continues to support China on its policy regarding Xinjiang, despite the human rights abuses in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region ((XUAR).
Apart from Yi, the session was also attended by Saudi Foreign Minister Faisal bin Farhan Al-Saud, OIC Secretary-General Hissein Brahim Taha, Islamic Development Bank President Muhammad Suleiman Al-Jasser among others. A video message by United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres was also shown.